# AYYANNA: A Multi-Script Web Font Family for Sri Lanka

## April 20, 2014 --

We propose to develop a complete Sri Lankan web font family, optimized
for comfortable reading of long texts with maximum legibility on
screens. Since Sri Lankan publishers use 3 scripts - Sinhala, Tamil and
Latin - we will develop each simultaneously to create a harmonious
family where no one script dominates. It will be the first Sinhala
typeface with a comprehensive set of weights, and we will draw
inspiration from 1970's Sri Lankan school textbook typefaces.

Today 15 million people use the Sinhala script (Department of Census and
Statistics, Sri Lanka. 2010. Census of Population and Housing 2010). The
explosive growth of internet access is only just beginning as \$25
smartphones launch later this year, bringing with it the need for
Sinhala fonts made for the web. The Sinhala [*blogging
community*](http://www.sinhalabloggers.com/) is already well established
with a growing readership, and the number of Sinhala websites advertised
in Sri Lanka's main streets is visibly increasing daily.

While Google's Noto Sinhala will be released in the future, it will only
include 1 or 2 weights of an upright style. While appropriate for the
Android UI, this is insufficient for the needs of web publishers who
need a wide variety of typography styles. As part of our project we will
pave the way for many more typefaces by defining glyph lists, OpenType
shaping features, and design and production methodologies.

We will deliver 4 weights in 1 family, plus an additional single-weight
stylistic variation for emphasis. This style is to be determined through
a thorough research process into what could work for Sinhalese as the
equivalent of a 'true italic.' In Latin there are both oblique and 'true
italic' styles used for emphasis within lines of text. While it is
straightforward to make an oblique derivative of an upright Sinhalese
typeface, we aim to do better. We have already initiated this research,
documenting styles found both in digital and physical media, such as in
this [*collection*](http://allslhelp.blogspot.in/2013/02/Fonts2040.html)
of legacy fonts and [*photographing*](http://foundtypelanka.tumblr.com/)
the hand-painted signs around Sri Lanka and [*archiving
*](http://ceylondisplay.com/)vintage design from Sri Lanka.

This research will be carried out over 16 weeks, and will not only
include this ground-breaking design research, but also restructure
essential information which has varied in the desktop era.

During this project, apart from the typefaces we produce, we will be
developing and sharing the following documents with the world:

1.  Glyph Set Recommendation
2.  OpenType Layout (glyph shaping) Recommendation
3.  Step by Step Guide to Sinhala Typeface Design Workflows: From the
    first root letters all the way to hinting considerations

While there are already 4 Sinhala OpenType specifications already
published (e.g. those in
[*ICTA*](http://www.icta.lk/programmes/pli-development/104-local-languages-initiative-/1090-sinhala-stylized-fonts.html)
and [*Font Master*](http://isiwara.lk/) collections) we find them
incomplete and in some cases incorrect. The proprietary nature of the
specifications used by [*Font Master*](http://isiwara.lk/) is hindering
the wider development of high quality Sinhala fonts.

We will work closely with linguists, calligraphers, authors and other
experts to develop authoritative standards for Sinhalese web typography.

The project will be fully open source from the beginning, released under
the SIL Open Font License, and documents published under the Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license (as used by Wikipedia.) We will
blog the process of development throughout.

  -- -- --
        
        
        
        
        
  -- -- --
